[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're
going through what we are going to call data
structures ways of organizing mathematics
into units into Arrangements there's four
main kinds of data structures that we're going
to be looking at lists ordered sets multi sets
and sets each of them has a self-contained
beautiful Theory and then they all end up
interacting with each other a little bit later
on so in our last video we talked about lists
today we're going to talk about ordered sets
ordered sets come about when we decide that
we're going to have our data structure
with an order as opposed to unordered and
where we decide that we're not going to allow
repetitions as opposed to allowing repetitions
so here's an example of an ordered set our
notation is that when we don't allow repetitions
we use these braces and when we have something
that's ordered we have commas if it's unordered
we don't have commas so this is an unconventional
approach to our notation so in this video we're
going to be talking about ordered sets like this
sometimes we might shorten that just say oets and
we'll see that the main object that we're going
to be interested in to focus our attention very
concretely and specifically are what we can call
O sets n k these are k o sets from n where K and
N are natural numbers and we're going to see
that there's an intimate connection between
this Theory and the theory of the symmetric group
or SN okay so our non-standard convention for an
ordered set that it's going to be enclosed in
Brackets which are like braces and repetitions
are not going to be allowed while the elements
are separated by commas and to be specific we're
going to look at Nal 5 when we're just going to be
using elements from 1 2 3 4 and 5 as the objects
that we're going to be trying to organize so
we're going to look at ordered sets 5K these
are K ordered sets from five means we're going
to try to create organized structures which are
ordered which don't have repetitions and all
of the elements that we're going to use are
going to be from this little collection right
here and let's also recall our prior agreement
that natural numbers for us are only going to be
considered in standard or reduced Hindu Arabic
form so we're only going to use natural numbers
written like this this is the only thing that
we're going to allow so if we want to write a four
we're going to write it that way we're not going
to allow 3 + 1 we're not going to allow 4.00
we're not going to allow some description like
the number after three if you want to express the
quantity four there's one and only one way that
we're going to allow and that's like this so we're
going to take the approach sort of of a computer
okay where we seriously constrain things so that
we know exactly what we're talking about okay so
that's what we're going to be talking about today
and we'll see that uh there's some interesting
connections not only with the symmetric group
but also with ringing church bells so let's
start off by listing some of these ordered sets
we'll start with the simplest or smallest ones
so when k equals z we're talking about just an
empty set braces like this with a space inside
when k equal 1 we're talking about a one orded
set can only contain one element and there are
these five possibilities when k equals 2 we have
these possibilities 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 2 1 2 3 2 4
2 5 3 1 3 2 3 4 3 5 41 42 43 45 and 51 52 53 54 a
total of of 20 different possibilities so we can
carry on with K = 3 then we get ordered sets that
look like this we could start 1 2 3 and then 1 2
4 1 2 5 and then maybe bumping up the two to get
1 3 4 135 1 45 then we can basically repeat the
order 132 142 152 we make our way eventually
to 5 43 it's not entirely obvious how to best
organize these three sets um but this is what
they end up looking like something like this
k = 4 we have 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 5 1 3 4 5 1 2 4 3 and
so on we keep going till eventually we get to 5 4
32 and with = 5 well there's a whole list of them
and the first one probably 1 2 3
4 5 and then eventually 5 4 3 2
1 so we could explicitly list them but uh
it involve a little bit more and more work
because the numbers of these things uh go up
as we increase but this is as far as we go when
we're considering oets from five if we're only
allowed to use the numbers 1 2 3 four and five
then we're not allowed to make any bigger ordered
sets because if we had six or more elements then
we would obviously have some repetitions and we're
agreeing that repetitions are not going to be
allowed so the maximum value of K is in this case
k = 5 since after that we must have repetition and
that's telling us that this particular case when
we have k equals 5 is somehow special that's the
maximum possible size we can get if we restrict
ourselves to n equals 5 so there's something a
little bit special about this maximal uh situation
here and in fact it is a very interesting and
important special situation in mathematics all
right so when we've been listing these ordered
sets from five we've seen that there's a bit
of a puzzle here how do we actually do this
in a systematic organized way in particular how
do we do it when we're looking at all five per
ations five permutations or five ordered sets
from five well it turns out that that question
has actually been studied very intensively by
church bell ringers so back in the maybe 1600s
in England there was this tradition that arose
of people ringing bells in a concerted kind of
orchestrated fashion and this is called ringing
the changes so let's say for example that your
church has three Bells labeled 1 2 and three and
so you have three people ringing the bells boom
boom boom okay so you can go boom boom boom over
and over again but it's a little bit boring but
it's more interesting if you change the order of
the Bells so the idea is to look at all possible
sequences of three bells and try to ring them in
such a way that you can work your way through all
possible three ordered sets from three but there's
a little bit of a rule here that the Bell ringers
have adopted which is that any one Bell changes
its position in the order by at most one in either
direction doesn't have to change its position but
if it is going to change its position it can only
be at most one so if you watch any one Bell say
three here's how it looks as we go along it's
always moving by a one so we're going to go 1 2
3 then 2 1 3 these basically swap order and then
the Swap and then uh we have another swap here
so basically we're always swapping adjacent uh
things and eventually the idea is to uh get back
to the place where you started from and we've gone
through all six permutations there now if you have
four Bells there's well there's more than one way
of ringing these changes going through all of them
but one way of doing it rather systematically that
uh it's in fact welln to all Bell ringers it's
called plain Bob so it's sort of like bell ringing
101 is to start with uh this a sequence here and
just add the fours in the right way so we start
with 1 2 3 then put in a four and then keep the
1 two 3 in its position and just have the four my
into all possible positions once you finish that
then you go to the next one 213 so you change the
1 2 3 to a 213 and then the four migrates back
to all all possible positions and then you the
213 switches to 2 31 and then back and forth the
fours go and this way you can systematically go
through all 24 uh four permutations from four so
it takes some skill and some practice and some
memorization and understanding of permutations
for a dedicated team of bell ringers to you go
through such a sequence very uh you know carefully
and making sure that nobody goes out of place and
making sure that you cover all the permutations
and of course the more Bells you have the more
interesting and Rich story this is uh um for
example I think the the world record in terms
of going through all the changes for a set number
of bells is eight Bells okay that took um probably
more than a day and was uh done in England
not that long ago I Me Maybe in the early
60s so there's in fact more than one way of doing
this of of going through a system and Bell ringers
have a elaborate kind of methods for doing this
in sort of a whole Little World very interesting
in fact there's chapters uh in in Australia and
New Zealand probably other English-speaking uh
countries too whether in Continental Europe there
are uh B ringers that go through this kind of
system I'm not sure maybe some of you can tell
us so in any case long before the mathematical
theory of permutations gotg going that was really
umbe probably 18th and 19th centur uh business uh
the the Bell ringers were very well versed with
permutations and the subtleties of them so the
ordered sets NN where we have all of the elements
one through n ordered in some particular way these
particular ordered sets are very important and
special because they connect with the rich theory
of permutations and the theory of the symmetric
group SN so for example if we have this particular
ordered set 31 254 from o set 55 that can be
Associated to a permutation so permutations have
different ways of being expressed in mathematics
here's one way of expressing such a thing we write
the numbers 1 2 3 4 5 and below them we write the
numbers in our order set 3 1 2 54 and we can think
about this as a a motion for example where the
uh the number one goes to the position three the
number two goes to the position one the thing in
the third position goes to two thing in the fourth
position goes to five thing in the fifth position
goes to four another way of visualizing such a
permutation might be in this way here with a kind
of a braid like diagram these are positions 1 2 3
4 and five so this is sort of before and after so
one goes to three is represented by this string
that goes from position one to position three here
we have two going to one three going to two four
going to five and five going to four yet another
way of expressing such a permutation is to sort of
follow what happens to one particular one so one
is going to go to three and then three is going
to go to two and then two is going to go to one so
we close off that and call that a cycle and four
goes to five and five goes to four so there's
another cycle this is called cycle notation for
the permutation it's another way of visualizing
or writing down or expressing permutation what
makes permutations so important is that they also
have an algebraic structure we can combine two
permutations to get another permutation this is in
the same kind of spirit as we combining lists as
we talked about last time but it's quite different
in the sense that in this case if you take two
permutations of a given size when you multiply
them you get another permutation of exactly the
same size and so the set of permutations of a
given size forms a closed algebraic structure
which we call the symmetric group so here's how
we do that so here's a permutation actually the
one that we looked at in the previous page 1 2 3
4 5 3125 4 and here's another permutation 1 2 3 4
5 2 4351 so how would we combine these well we we
get a third permutation and the way we figure out
what that is is we say all right if we apply
this one then the one goes to three and then
if we apply this one the three goes to three so
Al together the one goes to three how about the
two two goes to one under this permutation and
then applying the next permutation one goes to
two so Al together two goes to two three goes
to two under the first permutation and then two
goes to four under the second permutation so the
combined effect of that is to send three to four
four goes to five five goes to one so altogether
four goes to one and five goes to four and then
four goes to five so Al together five goes to
five all right this is a very pleasant way of
combining permutations and we can transfer that
to a multiplication of ordered sets so we might
as well multiply this ordered set by this ordered
set to give us the ordered set 3 2 4 1 5 right so
this is a very interesting and important structure
in mathematics that connects with lots of things
but it's a little bit more of an advanced topic
so we're not going to go much further right now
we'll talk about this a later point but the main
idea is that when we're considering these data
structures the data structure of an ordered
set is actually a very rich subject which
contains within it this vast field study of
permutations and the symmetric group in our
next video we're going to look at the Third Kind
of data structure on our list which is multi sets
this structure doesn't get as much press perhaps
as it deserves it's quite an interesting thing
which has uh some some interesting and in fact
curious uh aspects which I think you'll enjoy
so next time multi sets hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for listening
h